#19 documentation vignette ADTPET and ADAPET (#34)
pharmaverse/admiralneuro: vignettes/adpet.Rmd

---
title: "Creating ADTPET and ADAPET"
output: 
  rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Creating ADTPET and ADAPET}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

This article describes the creation of PET Scan ADaMs:

> starting with `ADTPET` (Tau PET Scan Analysis Dataset), followed by `ADAPET` (Amyloid PET Scan Analysis Dataset).

Reviewer: Add some details here to explicitly say that we recommend splitting out Amyloid and Tau into two different ADaMs but the vignette is joint between the two for initial setup, parameter mapping and finals steps, and then there are separate sections where the two diverge.

Author: updated

The examples of this vignette require the following packages.

```{r, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
library(admiral)
library(admiralneuro)
library(pharmaversesdtm)
library(dplyr)
library(lubridate)
library(stringr)
library(metatools)
```

# Programming Workflow

-   [Read in Data](#readdata)
-   [Initial PET Scan Analysis Dataset Set-up](#adpet_setup)
-   [Assign `PARAMCD`, `PARAM`, and `PARAMN`](#paramcd)
-   [Map `AVAL` and `AVALC` variables](#aval)
-   [`ADTPET` (Tau PET Scan Analysis Dataset)](#adtpet)
-   [`ADAPET` (Amyloid PET Scan Analysis Dataset)](#adapet)
    -   [Convert SUVR to Centiloid](#centiloid)
    -   [Derive Criterion Flag Variables for Amyloid Categories](#criterionfl)
-   [Remaining PET Scan Analysis Dataset Set-up](#dataset_end)

## Read in Data {#readdata}

To start, all data frames needed for the creation of `ADTPET` or `ADAPET` should be
loaded into the global environment. Reading data will usually be a
company specific process, however, for the purpose of this vignette, we
will use example data from `{admiralneuro}`. We will
utilize `NV`, `SUPPNV`, `AG` and `ADSL` for the basis of the Pet Scan ADaM datasets.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

> nv_neuro <- admiralneuro::nv_neuro

Author: Updated

suppnv_neuro <- admiralneuro::suppnv_neuro
ag_neuro <- admiralneuro::ag_neuro
adsl_neuro <- admiralneuro::adsl_neuro

nv <- convert_blanks_to_na(nv_neuro)
suppnv <- convert_blanks_to_na(suppnv_neuro)
ag <- convert_blanks_to_na(ag_neuro)
adsl <- convert_blanks_to_na(adsl_neuro)
```

While loading our input data, we can combine the `NV` domain and the `SUPPNV` supplementary domain for easier use in the next steps. Using the `metatools::combine_supp()` function avoids the need to manually transpose and merge the supplementary dataset with the corresponding domain.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
nv_suppnv <- combine_supp(nv, suppnv)
```

## Initial PET Scan Analysis Dataset Set-up {#adpet_setup}

> The following steps are used to merge `ADSL` variables with the source data `NV` (combined to `SUPPNV`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following steps are used to merge `ADSL` variables with the source data `NV` (previously combined with `SUPPNV`),
```

parameters will look like:

```{r, eval=TRUE, include=TRUE, message=FALSE}
adpet <- adpet %>%
  derive_vars_merged_lookup(
    dataset_add = param_lookup,
    new_vars = exprs(PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN),
    by_vars = exprs(NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC)
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
adpet_param <- distinct(adpet, USUBJID, NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN)
dataset_vignette(adpet_param, display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN))
```

### Map `AVAL` and `AVALC` variables {#aval_tpet}

Now that the parameter-level variables have been created, we can map the Analysis Value variables.
For these parameters, no complex derivation is required.
Note that `AVALC` should only be mapped if it contains non-redundant information.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
adpet <- adpet %>%
  mutate(
    AVAL = NVSTRESN,
    AVALC = if_else(
      is.na(NVSTRESN) | as.character(NVSTRESN) != NVSTRESC,
      NVSTRESC,
      NA
    )
  )
```

Having established the foundation of a global PET Scan Analysis Dataset (`adpet`),
we can now differentiate between Tau and Amyloid data.

## `ADTPET` (Tau PET Scan Analysis Dataset){#adtpet}

> Tau PET scan data do not require any further derivation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tau PET scan data generally do not require any further derivations.
```

> Therefore, only a selection of the corresponding Tau tracer records is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, if producing an `ADTPET`, we can now filter the global PET Scan Analysis Dataset `adpet` to retain only the Tau tracer records.
```

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
adtpet <- adpet %>%
  filter(AGCAT == "TAU TRACER")
```

## `ADAPET` (Amyloid PET Scan Analysis Dataset){#adapet}

> From this point forward, this section will focus exclusively on Amyloid data.
> To that end, we will select the Amyloid tracer records from the global PET Scan Analysis Dataset (`adpet`),
> for which the parameter-level and analysis value variables have already been created.

Reviewer: I don't think we need as many words here, what about:

```suggestion
If producing an `ADAPET`, we can now filter the global PET Scan Analysis Dataset `adpet` to retain only the Amyloid tracer records.
```

---
title: "Creating ADTPET and ADAPET"
output: 
  rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Creating ADTPET and ADAPET}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

This article describes the creation of PET Scan ADaMs.

> We recommend splitting out Amyloid and Tau into two distinct ADaMs datasets. The vignette presents

Reviewer 2: We use lower case "amyloid" and "tau" in sentences, unless they are at the beginning of a sentence.

)
```

This lookup may now be joined to the data and this is how the
parameters will look like:

```{r, eval=TRUE, include=TRUE, message=FALSE}
adpet <- adpet %>%
  derive_vars_merged_lookup(
    dataset_add = param_lookup,
    new_vars = exprs(PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN),
    by_vars = exprs(NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC, NVMETHOD, REFREG)
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
adpet_param <- distinct(adpet, USUBJID, NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC, NVMETHOD, REFREG, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN)
dataset_vignette(adpet_param, display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, NVTESTCD, NVCAT, NVLOC, NVMETHOD, REFREG, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARAMN))
```

### Map `AVAL` and `AVALC` variables {#aval_tpet}

Now that the parameter-level variables have been created, we can map the Analysis Value variables.
For these parameters, no complex derivation is required.
Note that `AVALC` should only be mapped if it contains non-redundant information.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
adpet <- adpet %>%
  mutate(
    AVAL = NVSTRESN,
    AVALC = if_else(
      is.na(NVSTRESN) | as.character(NVSTRESN) != NVSTRESC,
      NVSTRESC,
      NA
    )
  )
```

Having established the foundation of a global PET Scan Analysis Dataset (`adpet`),

> we can now differentiate between Tau and Amyloid data.

Reviewer 2: same here, tau and amyloid data.

## `ADTPET` (Tau PET Scan Analysis Dataset){#adtpet}

Tau PET scan data generally do not require any further derivations.
Therefore, if producing an `ADTPET`, we can now filter the global PET Scan Analysis Dataset `adpet` to retain only the Tau tracer records.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
adtpet <- adpet %>%
  filter(AGCAT == "TAU TRACER")
```

## `ADAPET` (Amyloid PET Scan Analysis Dataset){#adapet}

> If producing an `ADAPET`, we can now filter the global PET Scan Analysis Dataset `adpet` to retain only the Amyloid tracer records.

Reviewer 2: amyloid tracer

            suvr = AVAL
          ),
          PARAMCD = "CLAFBB",
          PARAM = "Centiloid (CL) based on AVID FBB",
          AVALU = "CL"
        )
      )
    ),
    derivation_slice(
      filter = (PARAMCD == "SUVRAFBP") & (NVMETHOD == "AVID FBP SUVR PIPELINE") & (REFREG == "Whole Cerebellum"),
      args = params(
        parameters = c("SUVRAFBP"),
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = compute_centiloid(
            tracer = "18F-Florbetapir",
            pipeline = "AVID FBP SUVR PIPELINE",
            ref_region = "Whole Cerebellum",
            suvr = AVAL
          ),
          PARAMCD = "CLAFBP",
          PARAM = "Centiloid (CL) based on AVID FBP",
          AVALU = "CL"
        )
      )
    )
  )
```

This is how the parameters and newly converted parameters will look like:

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
adapet_param <- distinct(adapet %>% filter(NVTESTCD == "SUVR" | !is.na(AVALU)), USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, AVAL, AVALU, ADT, ADY, VISIT)
dataset_vignette(adapet_param %>% arrange(USUBJID, ADT), display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, AVAL, AVALU, ADT, ADY, VISIT))
```

### Derive Criterion Flag Variables for Amyloid Categories{#criterionfl}

> Having converted the Standardized Uptake Value Ratio to Centiloid, we can now derive

Reviewer 2: maybe use SUVR here as it is defined earlier.
